GEP-0043: Spegel Registry Support in the registry-cache extension (#44)
gardener/enhancements: geps/0043-spegel-registry-support-in-the-registry-cache-extension/README.md

### Introduction

A brief overview of the components used in this proposal.

#### Spegel overview

[Spegel][spegel] is a p2p image cache. It runs a local image registry on each node in a Kubernetes cluster. The local registry subscribes for containerd's image related events and serves image blobs and manifests that are available in the containerd image store.
The content discovery in a Kubernetes cluster is based on [Kademlia DHT][content-provider-routing]. When an image content (blob, manifest or index) is available in the containerd image store, Spegel adds its `digest` to the DHT provider store, announcing that the node provides the content corresponding to the `digest`. Then, when the same `digest` is needed by another node, Spegel searches the DHT for peers that provide the content and pulls it from them.

The straightforward way to deploy Spegel to a Kubernetes cluster is by using the provided helm chart. However, this has some [drawbacks](https://spegel.dev/docs/faq/#what-should-i-do-if-other-pods-are-scheduled-on-new-nodes-before-spegel) when a new node joins the cluster.

> Our goal is to be able to use Spegel for all images pulled from the kubelet, including the `registry.k8s.io/pause` image. Therefore it was decided to [run][run-spegel-on-host] Spegel registry as a systemd unit service on the node. This requires contributing a new Spegel `bootstrapper` or extending the existing [HTTP bootstrapper](https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel/blob/6f02215fa3fc1d3bbdb11fa62dfa7c07dbe3b7c2/pkg/routing/bootstrap.go#L131-L135).

Author: Тhere is no significant difference.

> Our goal is to be able to use Spegel for all images pulled from the kubelet, including the `registry.k8s.io/pause` image. Therefore it was decided to [run][run-spegel-on-host] Spegel registry as a systemd unit service on the node. This requires contributing a new Spegel `bootstrapper` or extending the existing [HTTP bootstrapper](https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel/blob/6f02215fa3fc1d3bbdb11fa62dfa7c07dbe3b7c2/pkg/routing/bootstrap.go#L131-L135).

Author: Yes, it was removed with [Remove Kubernetes bootstrapper](https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel/pull/799) PR.

#### Kademlia Distributed Hash Table Overview

[Kademlia DHT][kad-dht] is part of libp2p library and is used by Spegel for peer routing and content provider advertisement and discovery. 
A unique 256 bits ID is [generated](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/blob/636d44e15abc7bfbd1da09cc9fef674249625ae6/core/peer/peer.go#L163) for each peer node (this is the `Ed25519` public key in Spegel case). Based on the node ID, a routing table consisting of `k`-Buckets is maintained. Peers nodes are placed into `k`-Buckets based on how similar their IDs are to the local node's ID, using `XOR` distance to measure proximity. 

- An example with 4 bits ID 0110 there will be 4 buckets for prefixes 1xxx (distance >= 8), 00xx (distance in [4,5,6,7]), 010x (distance in [2,3]) and 0111 (distance = 1)

  ![alt text](spegel-kad-dht.png)

For each prefix, at most `k` nodes are included. The default value for `k` is [20](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-kad-dht/blob/77a76e94564531977d4bb65f740674798a39543a/amino/defaults.go#L26).

> When a node joins the cluster, it must know the address of at least one peer (also known as [bootstrap peer](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-kad-dht/blob/0ad6ca5eeecff43283a334120a12f8c0add79f1b/dht.go#L521-L542)). The new node connects to the bootstrap peers and adds them to the routing table. It sends [`FIND_NODE`](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-kad-dht/blob/0ad6ca5eeecff43283a334120a12f8c0add79f1b/rtrefresh/rt_refresh_manager.go#L246) to bootstrap nodes for its own ID and receive information for the `k` closest nodes, adding them to the routing table. The new node then sends [`FIND_NODE`](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-kad-dht/blob/0ad6ca5eeecff43283a334120a12f8c0add79f1b/rtrefresh/rt_refresh_manager.go#L263) to the appropriate peers in the routing table for random keys within ranges corresponding to its empty `k`-Buckets. During the peer connection process, other peers may [add](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-kad-dht/blob/23423e3911906b85db01a829f6e36e3917185cf5/dht.go#L503-L507) the new node ID to their routing tables.

Author: The proximity is based on XOR distance, so in this context `close` means nodes with IDs that have smallest XOR values with the current node ID.

When an image, manifest, or blob becomes available on a node, it sends an [`ADD_PROVIDER`](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-kad-dht/blob/0ad6ca5eeecff43283a334120a12f8c0add79f1b/routing.go#L437-L466) message to the `k` peers that are closest to the content `digest`. Then, if the `digest` is needed by another node, it sends a [`GET_PROVIDERS`](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-kad-dht/blob/0ad6ca5eeecff43283a334120a12f8c0add79f1b/routing.go#L538-L619) message to the peers closest to the `digest` and receives a set of peers that provides the content.

### Registry Spegel API Design

The `registry-spegel` API design is simple and provides options to overwrite default values for Spegel's `registryPort`, libp2p `routerPort`, and `metricsPort`.
```go
// SpegelConfig contains information about the Spegel listening addresses of each Node.
type SpegelConfig struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

> 	// RegistryPort is the port that serves the OCI registry on each Node.

Author: As mentioned in the above [comment](https://github.com/gardener/enhancements/pull/44#discussion_r2812450943) default ports will be changed, but with current defaults it listen on:
```
spegel     799   root    6u  IPv6  881781      0t0  TCP *:5001 (LISTEN)
spegel     799   root    7u  IPv4  881782      0t0  TCP *:5001 (LISTEN)
spegel     799   root    8u  IPv6  881797      0t0  TCP *:5000 (LISTEN)
spegel     799   root    9u  IPv6  881799      0t0  TCP *:9090 (LISTEN)
```

> 	// RegistryPort is the port that serves the OCI registry on each Node.

Author: Now it listens only on node's internal IP address.

	// `routerPort` should be a valid port number (1-65535, inclusive).
	// Defaults to 5001.
	// +optional
	RouterPort *int32 `json:"routerPort,omitempty"`
	// MetricsPort is the metrics port on each Node.
	// `metricsPort` should be a valid port number (1-65535, inclusive).
	// Defaults to 9090.
	// +optional
	MetricsPort *int32 `json:"metricsPort,omitempty"`
}
```

### Architecture Overview 

The `registry-spegel` extension type will be enabled by default for all Shoot clusters in the operator extension resource:
```yaml
apiVersion: operator.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Extension
metadata:
  name: extension-registry-cache
  annotations:
    security.gardener.cloud/pod-security-enforce: baseline
spec:
  resources:
  - kind: Extension
    type: registry-spegel
    autoEnable: [shoot]
    clusterCompatibility: [shoot]
  - kind: Extension
    type: registry-cache
    clusterCompatibility: [shoot]
  - kind: Extension
    type: registry-mirror
    clusterCompatibility: [shoot]
...
```
Spegel `bootstrapper` is deployed into the Shoot namespace in the Seed cluster. In the Shoot cluster nodes the `containerd`, `spegel`, and `kubelet` systemd units are started.

> When `spegel` is starting, it gets the bootstrap peers from the `bootstrapper` and registers for image related events in `containerd`. It also lists existing content in the image store and advertises it to the DHT.

Author: In this case Spegel returns 404 and containerd fall back to upstream registry:
```
Feb 23 13:25:24 spegel[768]: {"time":"2026-02-23T13:25:24.027277587Z","level":"ERROR","source":{"function":"github.com/spegel-org/spegel/pkg/httpx.(*ServeMux).Handle.func1.1","file":"/build/pkg/httpx/mux.go","line":80},"msg":"","err":"MANIFEST_UNKNOWN could not find peer for registry.k8s.io/pause:3.10","path":"/v2/pause/manifests/3.10","status":404,"method":"HEAD","latency":"1.100958ms","ip":"::1","handler":"mirror","registry":"registry.k8s.io"}
Feb 23 13:25:24 spegel[768]: {"time":"2026-02-23T13:25:24.074244712Z","level":"ERROR","source":{"function":"github.com/spegel-org/spegel/pkg/httpx.(*ServeMux).Handle.func1.1","file":"/build/pkg/httpx/mux.go","line":80},"msg":"","err":"MANIFEST_UNKNOWN could not find peer for registry.k8s.io/pause:3.10","path":"/v2/pause/manifests/3.10","status":404,"method":"HEAD","latency":"706.125µs","ip":"::1","handler":"mirror","registry":"registry.k8s.io"}
Feb 23 13:25:25 spegel[768]: {"time":"2026-02-23T13:25:25.441465754Z","level":"ERROR","source":{"function":"github.com/spegel-org/spegel/pkg/routing.ensureOnline.func2","file":"/build/pkg/routing/p2p.go","line":460},"msg":"failed to run bootstrap","err":"Get \"https://sp-local--local.ingress.local.seed.local.gardener.cloud/bootstrap-nodes\": tls: failed to verify certificate: x509: certificate is valid for ingress.local, not sp-local--local.ingress.local.seed.local.gardener.cloud","attempts":6}

Feb 23 13:25:24 containerd[623]: time="2026-02-23T13:25:24.035447878Z" level=debug msg=resolving host="localhost:5500"
Feb 23 13:25:24 containerd[623]: time="2026-02-23T13:25:24.035467170Z" level=debug msg="do request" host="localhost:5500" request.header.accept="application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json, application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.list.v2+json, application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json, application/vnd.oci.image.index.v1+json, */*" request.header.user-agent=containerd/v2.1.3 request.method=HEAD url="http://localhost:5500/v2/pause/manifests/3.10?ns=registry.k8s.io"
Feb 23 13:25:24 containerd[623]: time="2026-02-23T13:25:24.036964795Z" level=debug msg="fetch response received" host="localhost:5500" response.header.content-length=127 response.header.content-type=application/json response.header.date="Mon, 23 Feb 2026 13:25:24 GMT" response.status="404 Not Found" url="http://localhost:5500/v2/pause/manifests/3.10?ns=registry.k8s.io"
Feb 23 13:25:24 containerd[623]: time="2026-02-23T13:25:24.036991462Z" level=info msg="trying next host after status: 404 Not Found" host="localhost:5500"
```

Let `kubelet2` on Node2 pull the same image. In this case, `spegel2` looks up the image content in the DHT and finds that the content is available on Node1. It then fetches the contents from the `spegel1` registry on Node1 and streams it directly into the response to `containerd2`. The `containerd2` then fires the image events and `spegel2` added itself as a content provider to the DHT.
Finally, let `kubelet<N>` on Node<N> pull the same image. Here, when `spegel<N>` looks for content, it finds that it is available on Node1 and Node2. It will then fetch some layers from Node1 and some from Node2.

### Spegel Binary and Systemd Units

The `spegel` binary will be provided to the node in the `/opt/bin/` folder via the `OperatingSystemConfig` mutation. The same goes for the `spegel_metrics.sh` script used to write metrics to the node-exporter's textfile collector.
The same approach is used for systemd units:

> - `spegel.service` systemd unit service depends on containerd service and must be started before the kubelet service:

Reviewer: Running spegel as a systemd unit has significant drawbacks: no visibility in Kubernetes (think DaemonSet/pod status, logs, etc.), easier debugging (e.g., port-forward), no monitoring (shoot system components condition), etc.

```sh
[Unit]
Description=spegel daemon
Documentation=https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel
After=containerd.service
Requires=containerd.service
Before=kubelet.service
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
[Service]
Restart=always
RestartSec=5

> MemoryHigh=80M

Author: Added in [risks-downsides-and-trade-offs](https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/enhancements/blob/4a20cedc882c88561627c44268bbdb9c798c1c90/geps/0043-spegel-registry-support-in-the-registry-cache-extension/README.md#risks-downsides-and-trade-offs).

MemoryMax=100M
ExecStart=/opt/bin/spegel registry <params-list>
```

- `spegel-metrics.service` systemd unit service forward Spegel metrics to the node exporter in `/var/lib/node-exporter/textfile-collector/spegel.prom` file:
```sh
[Unit]
Description=spegel metrics daemon
Documentation=https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel
After=spegel.service
BindsTo=spegel.service
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target spegel.service
[Service]
Restart=always
RestartSec=5
ExecStart=/opt/bin/spegel_metrics.sh
```

Certificates used for `mTLS` with the `Bootstrapper` are also provided.

### Containerd Configuration

> The `registry-spegel` extension ensures that the [`discard_unpacked_layers`](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/cb15e731a101d3cfdb94e4c905e43318929104aa/internal/cri/config/config.go#L293-L296) setting is set to false. This is done via `CRIConfig.Containerd.Plugins` in `OperatingSystemConfig`.

Author: It's important because if `discard_unpacked_layers = true` the image layers are deleted from the containerd
image store after unpacking - [ref]( https://spegel.dev/docs/getting-started/#compatibility).

### Spegel Bootstrapper

In the Shoot control plane a Spegel `bootstrapper` is provided. It consist of:
- deployment
- service
- ingress

The `spegel` registries send a GET request to `https://<ingress-host>/bootstrap-nodes` to get the bootstrap peers. Traffic is encrypted using mTLS.
The `bootstrapper` uses client-go to access the `kube-apiserver` and list the Kubernetes nodes. It sorts the nodes and returns a subset of the first few node `net.IPAddr` addresses, similar to what is done in [`DNSBootstrapper`](https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel/blob/v0.6.0/pkg/routing/bootstrap.go#L77-L80).

### Observability and Monitoring

The `spegel` registry exposes the following noticeable metrics:
- `http_response_size_bytes` - The size of the HTTP responses - histogram type.
- `http_request_duration_seconds` - The latency of the HTTP requests - histogram type.
- `spegel_mirror_requests_total` - Total number of mirror requests - counter type.
- `spegel_resolve_duration_seconds` - The duration for router to resolve a peer - histogram type.
- `spegel_advertised_keys` - Number of keys advertised to be available - gauge type.

> With these metrics, Spegel cache efficiency can be tracked.

Reviewer 2: Clarified in https://github.com/gardener/enhancements/pull/44#discussion_r2813134110.

### Future Enhancement

In the [Network topology awareness][network-topology-awareness] issue there are options to implement zone aware routing (e.g., enhance Kademlia DHT with Soft Partitioning).

> A simple approach was tested locally on GCP infrastructure. When the content is available on the node, it registers `<digest>` and `<zone><digest>` as keys in the DHT. The disadvantage of this approach, besides duplication of keys, is that when searching for content, the `<zone><digest>` key is tried first, and if nothing is found, a new search is performed for the `<digest>` key.

Author: The disadvantage is increased latency in case second search will be performed and increased numbers of keys i.e. for each digest there will be `zones-count` + 1 keys.
We could try to contribute this in step 3 of [Next steps](https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/enhancements/blob/70ad22726cf4e694d31d6381b1510bda21e41fc4/geps/0043-spegel-registry-support-in-the-registry-cache-extension/README.md#next-steps).

In the [enriching-kademlia-by-partitioning](https://research.protocol.ai/publications/enriching-kademlia-by-partitioning/monteiro2022.pdf) research the DHT partitioning is build in functionality.

### Proof of Concept

There is **PoC** of the above proposal available here:
- https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/tree/spegel_api_poc
- https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/spegel/tree/poc

## Impact and Alternatives

### Risks, Downsides and Trade-offs

> The external `Bootstrapper` should be contributed to Spegel.

Reviewer 2: Upstream contribution was accepted. Hence, the point is obsolete.

![alt text](spegel-architecture.png)

Let `kubelet1` on Node1 pull an image. It sends a CRI PullImage request to `containerd1`. Then `containerd1` checks the mirror configuration in `hosts.toml` and sends a request to the local `spegel1` registry. The image doesn't exists on any node, so 404 NotFound is returned. The `containerd1` then pulls the image from the upstream and fires `/images/create` and `/content/create` events. Events are processed by `spegel1` and it is added as a content provider to the DHT for the image.
Let `kubelet2` on Node2 pull the same image. In this case, `spegel2` looks up the image content in the DHT and finds that the content is available on Node1. It then fetches the contents from the `spegel1` registry on Node1 and streams it directly into the response to `containerd2`. The `containerd2` then fires the image events and `spegel2` added itself as a content provider to the DHT.
Finally, let `kubelet<N>` on Node<N> pull the same image. Here, when `spegel<N>` looks for content, it finds that it is available on Node1 and Node2. It will then fetch some layers from Node1 and some from Node2.

### Spegel Binary and Systemd Unit

> The `spegel` binary will be provided to the node in the `/opt/bin/` folder via an `OperatingSystemConfig` mutation. The same approach is used for `spegel.service` systemd unit that depends on containerd service and must be started before the kubelet service:

Reviewer: Do we use the image ref feature of OSC/node-agent to place the spegel binary on the nodes?

Author: Yes, the Spegel binary is delivered via OSC `FileContent.ImageRef`.

```sh
[Unit]
Description=spegel daemon
Documentation=https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel
After=containerd.service
Requires=containerd.service
Before=kubelet.service
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
[Service]
Restart=always
RestartSec=5
MemoryHigh=80M
MemoryMax=100M
ExecStartPre=/bin/sh -c 'sed -i "s/<<HOST_IP>>/$(hostname -i)/g" /var/lib/spegel/env'
ExecStartPre=/bin/sh -c 'find /etc/containerd/certs.d -type f -name "*.toml" | xargs sed -i "s/<<HOST_IP>>/$(hostname -i)/g"'
EnvironmentFile=/var/lib/spegel/env
ExecStart=/opt/bin/spegel \
    registry \
    --log-level=INFO \
    --mirror-resolve-retries=3 \
    --mirror-resolve-timeout=20ms \
    --registry-addr=${HOST_IP}:15500 \
    --router-addr=${HOST_IP}:15501 \
    --metrics-addr=${HOST_IP}:19090 \
    --containerd-sock=/run/containerd/containerd.sock \
    --containerd-namespace=k8s.io \
    --bootstrap-kind=http \
    --http-bootstrap-url=https://<spegel_bootstrapper_domain_name>/bootstrap-nodes \
    --http-bootstrap-cert-dir=/var/lib/spegel/certs \
    --containerd-content-path=/var/lib/containerd/io.containerd.content.v1.content
```

> The certificates used for `mTLS` with `Bootstrapper` are also provided in the `/var/lib/spegel/certs` folder via the `OperatingSystemConfig` resource.

Reviewer: Is the communication between spegel peers also authenticated via mTLS?

Author: No, only the connection from nodes to the Spegel bootstrapper in the Seed is `mTLS` authenticated. 
The Spegel router traffic is encrypted (libp2p layer), but the registry traffic is unencrypted.

Reviewer: Is the p2p communication authenticated? I.e., does a spegel instance present a client certificate when talking to another instance?

> but the registry traffic is unencrypted.

Is this a security concern? Could some attacker serve a malicious image?

Author: > Is the p2p communication authenticated? 

Two separate channels:
- libp2p router / DHT (--router-addr): yes — go-libp2p DefaultSecurity (TLS 1.3 or Noise), mutually authenticated via each peer's Ed25519-derived ID.
- Registry content endpoint (--registry-addr, http://…:15500): no client cert — plain HTTP.

> Is this a security concern? Could some attacker serve a malicious image?

For content pulled by digest, no: containerd verifies the bytes against the requested sha256.
The real trust boundary is tag resolution. With `resolveTags=true` a malicious peer could resolve e.g. :latest to a digest it controls (tag→digest resolution is inherently trusted). This is bounded - peers only join via the mTLS bootstrapper on the node-internal network - and resolveTags can be set to false to serve content by digest only.

Reviewer: Makes sense, thanks for elaborating. 
I think this is acceptable, but should be documented :)

### Containerd Configuration

> The `registry-spegel` extension ensures that the [`discard_unpacked_layers`](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/cb15e731a101d3cfdb94e4c905e43318929104aa/internal/cri/config/config.go#L293-L296) setting is set to `false`. This is done via the `CRIConfig.Containerd.Plugins` field in the `OperatingSystemConfig` resource. If the value is `true` the image layers are deleted after unpacking and Spegel cannot serve the content. For details, see [Spegel compatibility](https://spegel.dev/docs/getting-started/#compatibility). `discard_unpacked_layers` is `false` by default on gardenlinux:

Reviewer: In comparison to systems where `discard_unpacked_layers` is set to `true` by default, will the spegel extension increase the root disk usage?
If so, this should be documented properly because it may come as a surprise to users who expect that spegel will just reuse what is already cached on the node.

Author: Added as a trade-off

```bash
$ cat /etc/containerd/config.toml
disabled_plugins = []
...
version = 3
...
[plugins]

  [plugins."io.containerd.cri.v1.images"]
    concurrent_layer_fetch_buffer = 0
    disable_snapshot_annotations = true
    discard_unpacked_layers = false
...
``` 

> The `registry-spegel` extension will configure the containerd with a [`_default`][setup-default-mirror-for-all-registries] mirror configuration for the local `spegel` registry:

Reviewer: Will this mutation happen via the `CRIConfig.Containerd.Registries` field in the OSC?
If so, how can we guarantee that this configuration is applied before we start pulling other images?

Author: Yes, via `CRIConfig.Containerd.Registries` in the `EnsureCRIConfig` webhook. 
Ordering is guaranteed because GNA apply the OSC configuration before starting service units, and `spegel.service` is ordered `Before=kubelet.service`.

```bash
$ tree /etc/containerd/certs.d
/etc/containerd/certs.d
└── _default
    └── hosts.toml

$ cat /etc/containerd/certs.d/_default/hosts.toml
# managed by gardener-node-agent
[host."http://<node-internal-ip>:15500"]
  capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
```

For existing mirror configurations (e.g., provided by `registry-cache` and `image-rewriter` extensions) it will inject the local spegel registry as a first host entry in the `hosts.toml` file. This will be done via the mutation of the `CRIConfig.Containerd.Registries` field in `OperatingSystemConfig` resource and requires also a change in the components that mutate registry configurations (via webhooks) to respect this change.

### Spegel Bootstrapper

In the Shoot control plane a Spegel `bootstrapper` is provided. It consists of:
- Deployment
- Service
- Istio VirtualService and Gateway

The `spegel` registries send a GET request to `https://<spegel_bootstrapper_domain_name>/bootstrap-nodes` to get the bootstrap peers. Traffic is encrypted using mTLS.

> The `bootstrapper` uses client-go to access the `kube-apiserver` and lists the Kubernetes nodes. It sorts the nodes and returns a subset of the first few node `net.IPAddr` addresses, similar to what is done in [`DNSBootstrapper`](https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel/blob/v0.6.0/pkg/routing/bootstrap.go#L77-L80).

Reviewer: How are nodes sorted? By age or name?

Author: By node `InternalIP` address using `netip.Addr` [compare](https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/blob/ab60b79c58283b8de73c99c61e19af79db2c62fb/cmd/gardener-extension-spegel-bootstrap/main.go#L95).

Reviewer: Ok. Is there a specific reason behind it?

Author: The same order is used in DNS bootsrtapper - [ref](https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel/blob/3c32fc5addfd0b5bb8a34a60281a142fe0118584/pkg/routing/bootstrap.go#L112).

Reviewer: Ok, got it :)

> The `bootstrapper` uses client-go to access the `kube-apiserver` and lists the Kubernetes nodes. It sorts the nodes and returns a subset of the first few node `net.IPAddr` addresses, similar to what is done in [`DNSBootstrapper`](https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel/blob/v0.6.0/pkg/routing/bootstrap.go#L77-L80).

Reviewer: Does the bootstrapper watch/cache `Node` objects?

Author: Currently no, but this could be changed: https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/blob/ab60b79c58283b8de73c99c61e19af79db2c62fb/cmd/gardener-extension-spegel-bootstrap/main.go#L68

Reviewer: Ok. But I understand that the bootstrapper endpoint is only consulted when spegel starts on a new node, is that correct?
If so, watching/caching might be unnecessary.

Author: Usually yes, but the bootstrap function can be called at runtime if more peers are needed to fill gaps in routing table (e.g. some nodes have disappeared).

Reviewer: Ok. Then this should still be fine from a scalability point of view. Let's spare the watch cache memory usage in favor of a few more API server requests.

### Observability and Monitoring

> The `spegel` registry exposes the following noticeable metrics:

Reviewer: I assume that the metrics will be scraped by prometheus running in the control plane using node service discovery. Is that correct?

Author: Yes, exactly:  [ScrapeConfig](https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/blob/ab60b79c58283b8de73c99c61e19af79db2c62fb/pkg/component/spegel/monitoring.go#L46).

- `spegel_advertised_keys` - Number of keys advertised to be available - gauge type.

With these metrics, Spegel cache's efficiency can be tracked. In the PoC branch, a [sample dashboard](https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/blob/spegel_api_poc/pkg/component/registrycaches/monitoring/dashboard.json) is created.

### Future Enhancement

In the [Network topology awareness][network-topology-awareness] issue there are options to implement zone aware routing (e.g., enhance Kademlia DHT with Soft Partitioning).

A simple approach was tested locally on GCP infrastructure. When the content is available on the node, it registers `<digest>` and `<zone><digest>` as keys in the DHT. The disadvantage of this approach, besides duplication of keys, is that when searching for content, the `<zone><digest>` key is tried first, and if not enough peers providing the content are found, a new search is performed for the `<digest>` key.

### Proof of Concept

There is **PoC** of the above proposal available here:
- https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/tree/spegel_api_poc

## Impact and Alternatives

> ### Risks, Downsides and Trade-offs

Reviewer: This section is empty

> ### Alternative approaches

Reviewer: For completeness sake, can you add the `DaemonSet`-based spegel deployment as a considered alternative?

[`Dragonfly`][dragonfly] was evaluated as an alternative. Unlike Spegel, it is not stateless and requires central components such as:
- manager - to manage the p2p network.
- scheduler - for optimal parent peer selection.

They require `mysql` and `redis` storages. Another disadvantage is the additional image store on the node's root disk.

> ## Decision Request

Reviewer: I'd say you can remove this section. It's also no longer part of the GEP template.

  - Only one set of [upstream credentials](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-registry-cache/blob/v0.19.0/docs/usage/registry-cache/upstream-credentials.md#how-to-provide-credentials-for-upstream-registry) is supported, therefore some private images cannot be cached.
  - Amazon ECR mirroring is not supported - [ref](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-registry-cache/issues/259).
  - Dynatrace registry mirroring is not effective, as incorrect `Content-Length: 0` header is returned for most of the image layers.
  - It is not possible to mirror private registries authenticated with a kubelet image credential provider - [ref](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-registry-cache/issues/240).
  - Registry pods scaling is challenging and resource consuming.
  - [TTL](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-registry-cache/blob/v0.19.0/docs/usage/registry-cache/configuration.md#garbage-collection) garbage collection setting is inefficient because it is not extended on access. Hence, an image is always deleted from the cache when its TTL expires, and will be re-pulled from upstream if requested again.

### Why Should We Care

> Because the `registry-cache` cannot be enabled globally and not all upstream registries are covered, downloading images results in significant NAT Gateway traffic costs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because the `registry-cache` cannot be enabled globally and not all upstream registries are covered, downloading images results in significant egress network traffic costs.
```

nit: Nat Gateway sounds like a infra specific solution, the more common term should be `egress network` or something similar.

### Who Benefits

- **End users** benefit from the reduced latency when pulling images.
- **Stakeholders** see reduced costs for NAT Gateways and registries.
- **Gardener operators** are no longer engaged in monitoring notifications of PV sizes in the registry caches.

### Goals

- Introduce a new `registry-spegel` extension type that installs Spegel local registry mirror on the Shoot cluster nodes.
- Allow operators to enable `registry-spegel` extension type globally for all Shoots in a Gardener landscape.
- All container images pulled by the kubelet should go through the Spegel registry mirror.

### Non-Goals

- `registry-spegel` is not a replacement for the existing `registry-cache` and `registry-mirror` extension types, and they can be configured together in a containerd `hosts.toml` file:
  ```toml
  server = "https://registry-1.docker.io"

  [host."http://<node-internal-ip>:15500"]
    capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]

  [host."https://<docker-registry-service-ip>:5000"]
    capabilities = ["pull","resolve"]
    ca = ["/etc/containerd/certs.d/ca-bundle.pem"]
  ```

> - Support for topology-aware routing to reduce cross-zonal traffic is part of future enhancements.

Reviewer 3: I do not know how to understand this statement when it is in non-goals. 
So, at first the spegel extension will not reduce the cross-zonal traffic compared to `registry-cache`/`registry-miror` extensions. 

So, is it a non-goal to resolve this issue in the future, or it can be resolved in the future?

Author: It will be implemented in the future with a new contribution to Spegel (if accepted).
I have already prepared a change, but it needs further refinement before opening a PR.

Reviewer 3: Ok, considering it depends on a feature in spegel and is mentioned in future enhancement, maybe it should not be removed from non-goals.

	// MetricsPort is the metrics port on each Node.
	// `metricsPort` should be a valid port number (1-65535, inclusive).
	// Defaults to 19090.
	// +optional
	MetricsPort *int32 `json:"metricsPort,omitempty"`
	// ResolveTags describes whether Spegel will resolve tags to digests.
	// Defaults to true.
	// +optional
	ResolveTags *bool `json:"resolveTags,omitempty"`
}
```

### Architecture Overview 

The `registry-spegel` extension type will support being enabled by default in the `operator.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1.Extension` resource:
```yaml
apiVersion: operator.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Extension
metadata:
  name: extension-registry-cache
  annotations:
    security.gardener.cloud/pod-security-enforce: baseline
spec:
  resources:
  - kind: Extension
    type: registry-spegel
    autoEnable: [shoot]
    clusterCompatibility: [shoot]
  - kind: Extension
    type: registry-cache
    clusterCompatibility: [shoot]
  - kind: Extension
    type: registry-mirror
    clusterCompatibility: [shoot]
...
```
Spegel `bootstrapper` is deployed into the Shoot namespace in the Seed cluster. In the Shoot cluster nodes the `containerd`, `spegel`, and `kubelet` systemd units are started.

> When `spegel` is starting, it gets the bootstrap peers from the `bootstrapper` and registers for image related events in `containerd`. It also lists existing content in the image store and advertises it to the DHT.

Reviewer 3: > It also lists existing content in the image store and advertises it to the DHT.

Is there any filtering applied? As far as I know there are namespaces in containerd and kubernetes resources resides in `k8s.io`, is spegel restricted only to this namespace or it covers all namespaces? 

Additionally, somebody/something other than kubelet can be pulling images in the `k8s.io` namespace, I guess spegel will advertise them even though they are not made available by kubelet?

Author: It is restricted to single [ContainerdNamespace](https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel/blob/3c32fc5addfd0b5bb8a34a60281a142fe0118584/main.go#L62) in our case it is `k8s.io` - [ref](https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/blob/ab60b79c58283b8de73c99c61e19af79db2c62fb/pkg/webhook/spegel/ensurer.go#L395).

> ![alt text](spegel-architecture.png)

Reviewer 3: You might want to consider documenting the exposure of the bootstrapper similarly to https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/advanced/control-plane-endpoints-and-ports.md if it is a prerequisite for setups where the nodes are behind firewall restricting the access to the control plane.

Author: The bootstrapper is exposed on the Shoot's Istio ingress (control-plane endpoint) reachable over mTLS, so it's in the same way other control-plane endpoints nodes must reach. 
I will document the exposure during production.

```sh
[Unit]
Description=spegel daemon
Documentation=https://github.com/spegel-org/spegel
After=containerd.service
Requires=containerd.service
Before=kubelet.service
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
[Service]
Restart=always
RestartSec=5
MemoryHigh=80M
MemoryMax=100M
ExecStartPre=/bin/sh -c 'sed -i "s/<<HOST_IP>>/$(hostname -i)/g" /var/lib/spegel/env'
ExecStartPre=/bin/sh -c 'find /etc/containerd/certs.d -type f -name "*.toml" | xargs sed -i "s/<<HOST_IP>>/$(hostname -i)/g"'
EnvironmentFile=/var/lib/spegel/env
ExecStart=/opt/bin/spegel \
    registry \
    --log-level=INFO \
    --mirror-resolve-retries=3 \
    --mirror-resolve-timeout=20ms \
    --registry-addr=${HOST_IP}:15500 \
    --router-addr=${HOST_IP}:15501 \
    --metrics-addr=${HOST_IP}:19090 \
    --containerd-sock=/run/containerd/containerd.sock \
    --containerd-namespace=k8s.io \
    --bootstrap-kind=http \
    --http-bootstrap-url=https://<spegel_bootstrapper_domain_name>/bootstrap-nodes \
    --http-bootstrap-cert-dir=/var/lib/spegel/certs \

>     --containerd-content-path=/var/lib/containerd/io.containerd.content.v1.content

Reviewer 3: Some of these paths may differ between linux distributions, have you thought about it already and how such a problem can be approached?

Author: Good catch, well I'll try to get `--containerd-content-path` and `--containerd-sock` values from the `containerd` config generated by GNA.

    concurrent_layer_fetch_buffer = 0
    disable_snapshot_annotations = true
    discard_unpacked_layers = false
...
``` 

The `registry-spegel` extension will configure the containerd with a [`_default`][setup-default-mirror-for-all-registries] mirror configuration for the local `spegel` registry:
```bash
$ tree /etc/containerd/certs.d
/etc/containerd/certs.d
└── _default
    └── hosts.toml

$ cat /etc/containerd/certs.d/_default/hosts.toml
# managed by gardener-node-agent
[host."http://<node-internal-ip>:15500"]
  capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
```

For existing mirror configurations (e.g., provided by `registry-cache` and `image-rewriter` extensions) it will inject the local spegel registry as a first host entry in the `hosts.toml` file. This will be done via the mutation of the `CRIConfig.Containerd.Registries` field in `OperatingSystemConfig` resource and requires also a change in the components that mutate registry configurations (via webhooks) to respect this change.

### Spegel Bootstrapper

In the Shoot control plane a Spegel `bootstrapper` is provided. It consists of:
- Deployment
- Service
- Istio VirtualService and Gateway

> The `spegel` registries send a GET request to `https://<spegel_bootstrapper_domain_name>/bootstrap-nodes` to get the bootstrap peers. Traffic is encrypted using mTLS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `spegel` registries send a GET request to `https://<spegel_bootstrapper_domain_name>/bootstrap-nodes` to get the bootstrap peers. Traffic is encrypted and authenticated using mTLS.
```

### Alternative approaches

#### Spegel as a DaemonSet

The straightforward way to deploy Spegel is to use upstream Helm chart and deploy it as a `DaemonSet`. This variant was implemented and tested as a PoC using the upstream DNS bootstrapper ([PoC](https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/tree/spegel_api_poc2)), which works out of the box.

Pros:
- Improved visibility in Kubernetes: native monitoring, debugging (`kubectl logs`), autoscaling and resource reservation.

Cons:
- Does not cover most images in the `kube-system` namespace, because the Spegel pod (and, for the DNS bootstrapper, `kube-dns`) must be running before it can serve content. Images pulled during node bootstrap - measured at roughly `200MiB` per node are pulled from the upstream instead of from a peer.
- Like the systemd approach, it does not cover images pulled by the `gardener-node-agent`.

> The systemd-unit approach was preferred because it covers **all** images pulled by the kubelet, including images from the `kube-system` namespace, which is where a significant share of the traffic savings comes from. The visibility trade-off is mitigated via metrics scraping.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The systemd-unit approach was preferred because it covers **all** images pulled by the kubelet, including images from the `kube-system` namespace, which is where a significant share of the traffic savings comes from. The visibility trade-off is mitigated by the Gardener observability stack.
```

I hope its logs are also collected and visible in Pluono?

Author: Yes, the `spegel.service` journald logs are collected - [ref](https://github.com/dimitar-kostadinov/gardener-extension-registry-cache/blob/ab60b79c58283b8de73c99c61e19af79db2c62fb/pkg/webhook/spegel/ensurer.go#L180).
